## 01 — INTRODUCTION

> “Business agility is a pathway to security in the workplace for employers and employees alike”

### 1.1. The challenges faced by agile transformations and the role of unions

Business agility is, in a nutshell, a system of organisation that allows a
business and its employees to duck, roll, and come up on their feet in the face
of sudden change. It’s a proven system of management and organisation practices
that offers advantages over traditional management processes in environments
where the ability to adapt is key to success. So why are some organisations
reluctant to adopt business agility values, principles, methods and procedures?

A number of potential obstacles stand in the way of teams seeking to adopt
business agility. These include butting heads with leadership who can be overly
cautious in adopting new management methods, a lack of personal investment on
the part of employers, or an organisational hierarchy that simply isn’t
compatible with a business agility approach. However, there are additional
challenges to overcome when introducing agility to a unionised environment.
Employee unions exist to safeguard and protect the rights and employment safety
of their members.

Business agility is very clear that it’s in the best interest of companies to
take care of their employees – happy employees create better products, better
relationships with customers, and greater profits. However, some unions have
experienced conflicts with senior management, resulting in a deterioration in
trust between the employers and those set to safeguard the employees. If prior
workplace change has arrived hand in hand with restructuring and redundancies,
it’s only natural for union organisers to become wary of managerial and
structural shifts.

Business agility does not require restructuring or redundancies. If anything,
business agility seeks to maintain and enhance the individual value of every
employee in an organisation. It creates a people-centric culture that values
human beings over workplace processes, equipment, and tools, with the focus
always being on how to maximise customer outcomes. These values may clash with
unions who are more predisposed to assuring the protection of established labor
rights rather than developing new solutions and arrangements that will, in the
long term, create better workplace situations for their members.

Friction between unions and business agility implementers doesn’t have to be the
norm. With open dialogue and shared understanding, unions, workers and management
alike can find solutions that increase adaptability and empower all stakeholders.
This whitepaper discusses and addresses specific challenges faced when
implementing business agility or agile values and principles in unionised
environments, and provides recommendations that will ensure leaders, unions and
employees all work towards mutual goals and solutions.

### 1.2. Life is unstable, but Business Agility helps you flex

Stability is a fundamental human need. It’s only natural for workers with
specific skillsets to prioritise job security over riskier opportunities for
advancement, to remain in guaranteed but potentially unsatisfying positions, and
to guard their incomes and livelihoods with insurance they may never use.

The truth is, life is unstable. Change sweeps through all societies in time.
Markets are eventually disrupted. Overseas competitors move unpredictably.
Steady industries, including those bubbled by protectionist economics,
eventually lose that protection. Even governments feel the pinch through the
outsourcing of work to private providers.

Building walls against change might shield a person (or organisation) in the
short term, but the most effective way to achieve employment stability is
through preparation to adapt.

Adopting business agility values and principles in the workplace is, in itself,
inviting instability into a business. Instability is the beating heart of agile
thinking. This shouldn’t be considered harmful. Rather, it’s future-proofing for
inevitable change. And, as a union’s primary aim is to protect the safety of its
workers, preparing employees for marketplace and industry disruptions should be
one of their foremost responsibilities.

Business agility strategies and implementations aren’t the enemy of employment
stability. They’re a pathway to security in the workplace for employers and
employees alike, and should be treated as such by unions and workers’ councils.
By helping workers expand and adapt their skillsets, and by assisting in
workplace education and agile retraining, we can better prepare them for major
industry transformations.

After all, we know those shakeups are coming. We just don’t know when.
