## 02 — BUSINESS AGILITY & UNIONS – AN OVERVIEW

> “Unions and Agile work towards similar goals – the protection and advancement of workers and organisations”

### 2.1. What is a unionised workforce?

Before we move on, let’s get on the same page. What is a unionised workforce?

Let’s begin with unions. Collective bargaining has at least a six hundred year
history but many of the structures of modern trade unions are direct responses
to scientific management, also known as Taylorism. Taylorism was a late 1800’s
management style that emphasised efficiency and productivity over worker
wellbeing, which existed in direct opposition to (and sometimes forcibly
disbanded) the unions of the time.

Taylorism is no longer the force it once was, but unions are still going strong,
and their distrust of disruptive management strategies persists to this day.

The exact definition of a union, and how they operate, differs from country to
country, but we can begin with some generalisations. For the purposes of this
whitepaper, a union is an organisation that acts as a mediator between workers
and managers. The union – often but not always composed of representatives
elected by employees – exists to communicate employee needs and recommendations
to management, and find mutually beneficial solutions to workplace problems.
They often negotiate better working conditions, pay structures, holiday and sick
leave entitlements, safety standards, raise individual grievances with
management, and so on. As a collective, they wield more bargaining power than
any individual employee could.

A union can operate inside an organisation without all the employees of that
organisation being members of the union. For example, some employees such as HR
and payroll staff may be considered part of the management team, which makes
them part of the body a union would negotiate with rather than represent. Even
employees who choose not to join the union will reap the benefits of the union’s
negotiations, depending upon the business’s enterprise agreement. Other
employees may not join the union as they feel they’re better served by
negotiating directly with management.

Throughout recent history, workers’ unions have frequently been major drivers of
social change. Paid leave, including sick leave and maternity leave, are union
achievements, as are the rights of workers to take lunch breaks, receive
termination pay, and protection from unfair dismissal. As mentioned earlier,
these rights differ from country to country and industry to industry. Even so,
it’s difficult to ignore the positive impact that unions have had on the lives
of employees around the globe.

This is why it’s vital to understand the structure and mindset of a unionised
workforce when considering the implementation of business agility practices. A
highly unionised workplace is made up of employees who are accustomed to
uniformity in workplace expectations, pay, benefits, rights, and so on. This
uniformity is a form of equality, where all employees receive the same
advantages, workloads, and options for advancement within the organisation.

Unionised equality provides a strong foundation for workers and can be
considered vital in establishing workplace safeguards, but as employees and
organisations evolve to meet changing demands that same equality can become
stifling.

Business agility focuses on equity rather than equality in the workplace. Equity
affords each employee the options and opportunities that best suit their skills,
personal needs, and plans for personal development, while emphasising customer
and business outcomes. Equality favours a collective while equity returns power
and choice to the hands of the individual.

Equality and equity aren’t enemies. Equality in labor standards sets the
groundwork for workers to feel confident and supported in their roles, while
equity in opportunity allows workers to grow their own skills and careers while
retaining safety nets in case of economic uncertainty. The two concepts should
not be in conflict. This is why, as we go on, it will become increasingly clear
that business agility implementation is best performed hand in hand with workers
unions, rather than in opposition to them.

### 2.2. What is the difference between unionised (and union-like) and non-unionised environments?

Some of the differences in how unionised and non-unionised workplaces operate
are less obvious than others. Changes in management style and worker mindset
affects how a business functions and how employees view their roles,
responsibilities and rights. This, in turn, changes how workers and management
relate and interact.

The role of a union is to act as the collective voice of workers: to bargain,
negotiate, implement change, to find mutually beneficial pathways for growth,
and more. The natural result is the collectivisation of workers. Employees with
a wide range of skills, goals and working styles become homogenised as their
roles, abilities, and compensations become standardised. In short – if you apply
the same rules, structures and expectations to a wide range of individuals,
don’t be surprised when all the aspects of those people that make them unique
start to vanish!

Non-unionised environments, on the other hand, may allow their employees to take
non-standard approaches to shaping their roles and personal growth within the
organisation. Individual workplace agreements between employees and employers
also result in private contracts determining salaries, holiday loading, sick pay
and so on. This isn’t without its drawbacks – confidential per-employee
negotiations may lead to secrecy, jealousy and discrimination among employees.
On the other hand, as a consequence of homogenisation and collective bargaining,
unionised workplaces naturally become more transparent. Worker compensation
packages become public knowledge.

Neither situation is inherently good or bad. Standardisation may be what an
individual employee or an organisation needs, and both rigidity and flexibility
can be virtues under the right circumstances. This whitepaper seeks to discuss
how to integrate the best of agile practices with the best of unionised
organisation, not to make a value judgement on which model is right for every
business.

### 2.3. What impact does a union-driven workforce have on agile/agility?

It’s said that you can’t fit a square peg into a round hole. Not true! Hammer
that square peg long enough and it’ll eventually lose its edges. In the same
manner, a consequence of standardised expectations, benefits and employment
packages across a workforce is that, over time, workers roles will become
similarly standardised.

This is the most fundamental point of opposition between Agile and unionised
environments. The first value of the Agile manifesto is “individuals and
interactions over processes and tools”. Traditional workplaces, by contrast, ask
individuals to reshape their skills, needs and goals in favour of satisfying
processes. In extreme (and not-recommended) examples, individuals can become
treated like tools – replaceable, interchangeable, their individuality devalued.

That’s not to say that unions don’t value individual workers. A well-managed
union looks out for the individual wellbeing of every member. But where business
agility prioritises the unique skills, processes and aspirations of each
employee, unions sometimes place greater value upon improving the position of
the worker collective. In addition, individuals who have been reshaped to
prioritise homogeneity and the smooth operation of the collective over their
personal skills and growth may be reluctant to embrace business agility.

Unions and Agile are not enemies. They work towards similar goals – the
protection and advancement of workers and organisations – using vastly different
methods. As such, it’s important to remember that this paper does not advocate
the replacing or undermining of unions and their efforts toward worker
protection. Rather, it seeks to find mutually satisfactory solutions to
workplace problems, both small and large.

### 2.4. Cultural and regional differences in unions

When discussing what unions do in the typical workplace, it’s vital to remember
that the roles, rights, operations, and legal responsibilities of unions differ
from nation to nation, region to region, and culture to culture.

For example, in Germany, national unions make large decisions regarding labour
agreements. A works council – a smaller organisation elected directly from a
firm’s ‘shop-floor’ employees – will then liaise with management to help adjust
these agreements to suit local standards and requirements. Works councils are
less common in Australia, where national unions are known to have more
adversarial relationships with management teams.

Australia and Germany can be used to illustrate a second key difference in how
unions operate and are treated around the world. Despite Australia’s long and
proud history of collective bargaining – Melbourne stonemasons were the first to
win the right to an eight-hour work day with no loss of pay – union influence
and membership has been in decline since the 1990s. Compare this situation with
German unions, where organisations with over 500 employees must include union
representation on their management boards.

It would be impossible to elaborate on every difference in international union
organisation and operation in one paper. So take care, and don’t make
assumptions about how local unions operate, either in a legal or practical
sense. Every new environment poses its own challenges and rewards.
