## 03 — WHAT CHALLENGES ARE BUSINESS AGILITY PRACTITIONERS FACING?

### 3.1. Rejection of experimentation approach due to lack of trust

Business agility practitioners face a host of challenges in unionised
environments. These challenges can arise before agile practices and procedures
are integrated into the workplace, or during the transition process. Triggers
for these challenges include financial, psychological or cultural issues. As
such, it’s important to understand not only the origin of these challenges, but
also how they affect workers, union representatives and business agility
practitioners alike.

The first and, perhaps, most deeply rooted problem faced during business agility
implementation is a lack of trust between employees, union representation and
management. This may arise due to a perceived incompatibility between Agile
processes and Union processes.

Put simply: business agility methods are built on quick and repeated
experimentation. Propose a solution, plan it, trial it, analyse and refine.
These methods apply to employee roles as well, where individuals are expected to
flex in and out of different roles when required. Union processes, by contrast,
can be slow to implement and slower to revise. Employees are generally expected
to stay in prescribed roles as set out by collective agreements, and
negotiations on labor standards between union representatives and management can
take years to reach an amicable conclusion. Once these rights and awards for
workers have been established, it’s only natural for unions to want those rights
locked in place for similarly long periods of time.

This isn’t to say that slow-moving labor negotiations and lean, iterative agile
workplace processes can’t operate in tandem. Similarly, workplace agreements can
be established between management and unions that allow for periods of
experimentation before final implementation. But employers have, in the past,
used the engines of workplace change as a trojan horse for worker exploitation,
the rolling back of previously established awards and entitlements, or forced
redundancies. In these cases, it’s only natural for unions to build taller walls
and safeguards around the worker compensations they’ve managed to hold on to.

The goal of a union is to comprehensively protect their employees for as long as
possible. In situations where trust in management has already been eroded, is it
any wonder that unions might be inflexible on issues or proposals that affect
workplace stability?

### 3.2. Aversion to change of ways of working due to fixed mindset

Unions, works councils and other workers associations have clear and strict
processes regarding the resolution of workplace disputes, negotiating for
improved worker conditions, or communicating between employers and employees.
Some of these processes are structured around internal regulations. Some are
dictated by external legal frameworks. For ease of understanding, where the
function or outcome of a European-style works council or alternative worker’s
association would overlap with the function or outcome of a traditional union,
we will simply refer to them as unions.

Regardless of where regulations originate, unions may be averse to adopting
business agility as they feel the changes would clash with existing procedures.
Changing established regulations is time consuming and costly. As for calling
for change to external legislation… that’s a route most unions would be
unwilling to take. It’s not that unions don’t want to improve their operations,
as well as the operations of their members. It’s a matter of those bodies not
having members on hand with the knowledge and experience to implement those
changes.

It’s important to clarify that the implementation of business agility doesn’t
always require changes in legislation or internal procedure. Instead, consider
that these principles advocate for a change in ways of working, within existing
boundaries. Business agility principles don’t demand to change the larger
structure of a business, only the ways in which employees work, grow and
negotiate.

A positive first step toward understanding and implementing business agility can
be for unions to adopt these same principles internally. Experimental and
experiential methods of organisation and decision making inside a union can
demonstrate how business agility can be incorporated into the function of an
organisation without pushing back against legal structures. If unions don’t have
the internal experience to handle such changes, business agility implementers
and experts are able to fill the gap.

If unions are willing to take the first step and change their own functions and
procedures in small ways to become more adaptable, they will recognise how the
flexibility inherent in business agility can be extended gradually across a
larger organisation, without clashing with pre-existing legal frameworks.

### 3.3. Compensation for multi-functional individuals

A third cause of friction is the conundrum of fair compensation for
multi-skilled employees, especially when those employees work across a broad
range of roles. In short: if an employee brings multiple skills to the
workplace, do you pay them differently for the different times they spend
utilising each skill? Is an employee defined by the most complex or demanding
skill they bring to the workplace, or the least?

Instances of this compensation dilemma can be found across multiple industries.
For example: when a commercial pilot helps clean the plane (as was the case
early on with Southwest Airlines), are they still compensated as a pilot
during those hours? Are they a pilot who cleans, or a cleaner who pilots? If a
bus driver also manages the depot in the evenings, do their wages spike
according to their new responsibilities? If a member of an IT team becomes a
temporary team leader during a period of illness, should their wages rise
temporarily to reflect new responsibilities, and should their wages remain at
that higher level afterwards, in light of the management skills they have
gained?

There are no simple answers to these questions. Business agility is built upon
principles of individual achievement and recognition; these include the
principle that motivated individuals should be given the support and trust they
need to get the job done, and that the best architectures and designs for
success emerge from self-organising teams. It follows that employees working
inside these models should be free to negotiate their own fair compensation. It
follows that wages may rise and fall dynamically, per employee, depending on
their ever-changing roles, skill sets, and use of those skills.

If this sounds complex, consider this: systems already exist that bridge the
divide between unionised “one-size-fits-all” compensation schemes and the
flexibility of recommended business agility pay schemes. For example, some
Australian public service divisions offer pay ranges for different roles, which
allows for an individual to negotiate fair adjustments to their compensation
based on skill sets, responsibilities and seniority.

### 3.4. Unions are seen as Preventers instead of Enablers

When it comes to workers rights, unions are enabling. They help create and
maintain healthy working relationships between employees and employers. But when
it comes to the implementation of business agility, unions may be seen as
preventers – not due to malice, but due to a resistance to change, and a fear of
irrelevance.

For example, works councils in Germany have developed complex and interwoven
hierarchies ranging from national union bodies, to regional committees, to the
smaller works councils inside each individual organisation. Each of these groups
has their own goals, their own interests, and their own entrenched procedures.
As mentioned earlier, business agility transformations don’t threaten the roles
and rights of individual workers, but they can be seen to threaten the status
quo by encouraging individuals to bypass the traditional union negotiation
structures, thereby reducing the union’s overall influence. The established
hierarchy of the works councils doesn’t mesh with the cross-functional, adaptive
structure that comes with business agility, and as such they are obstructive to
change.

This obstruction may manifest as an outright refusal to examine the advantages
of business agility. It might also be passive-aggressive. For example, existing
unions might agree to a gradual implementation of agile values, while insisting
that same implementation follow rules and regulations created for vastly
different times and contexts.

In the end, the best way to maintain good relationships with unions and
implement business agility procedures smoothly is through honesty,
communication, and consultation.

### 3.5. Legal conditions

Just as the legal obligations and purviews of unions differ across countries,
districts and industries, so do the legal frameworks surrounding employees. As
such, implementation of business agility must be tailored to meet specific
legislations.

This means that business agility implementation can’t be rushed or haphazard.
Unions often operate as co-designers in the structure of organisations, and
business agility teams must understand the legal frameworks surrounding their
teams in depth if they wish to take on similar roles, especially if
responsibilities previously attributed to a union or works council are now being
shared between unions and individuals. It’s vital that the implementation of
business agility be both creatively and legally secure, in order to ensure the
rights and compensations of every employee.

For example, legal conditions that may be associated with both unions and works
councils include them having an input into the start and end of the working day,
the scheduling of wages, the implementation of safety regulations & equipment,
the provision of housing leased to employees, and the use of any behavioural or
performance monitoring equipment, among other workplace matters. If unions and
management can’t come to amicable agreements on these points, the union has the
right to request the input of an external arbitration board, who will come to a
final decision on the matter.

As such, in cases where an existing union is engaged with implementing business
agility, their role includes ensuring the transformation conforms to all
existing legal standards. Care must also be taken to observe any legal
requirements regarding existing employee/employer relationships, and to maintain
employee representation  on management and union boards.

Business agility principles enhance and clarify the voices of employees. It’s
vital that union representatives understand how these principles conform to
existing workplace laws, so they can become enthusiastic participants in
workplace transformations.

### CASE STUDY — A LARGE EUROPEAN TRANSPORTATION COMPANY

A large European transportation company is new to business agility. Many of its
employees have preconceived notions about what agility brings to the table: open
plan offices, remote work, and forced teamwork. A split has formed through the
middle of the company. Younger employees are curious to learn more about
agility, but their older coworkers are feeling left behind. They’ve been trained
to receive and follow clear instructions from management rather than be
self-managed, and they resent feeling as if they have to constantly be available
for work.

The chairwoman of the company works council deals with recruitments, dismissals
and social problems. She’s also in close contact with unions that focus on
politics, social programs, regulation of working time and compensation. She
believes that, when it comes to introducing agility, a lack of confidence in
employers’ positive intentions is what’s led to these tensions between works
councils and organisational leadership.

As such, most members of the works council have demanded clear rules to which
managers must adhere. Several managers have tried to soften this lack of trust
by directly involving members of the works council in transformation programs,
but without success. Members of the council are trying to minimise their
relationships with agile implementation, as employees have begun blaming council
members directly for deteriorating working conditions. The result is that many
members of the works council have withdrawn from the agile transformation
process in favour of arguing against the transformative proposals of others.

While the works council of this transportation company is facing significant
challenges, there’s still hope for their ongoing agile transformation. Education
on agile ways of working and the benefits of agile values and principles for
employees may help to better inform them about the processes and advantages of
these new systems. Transparency in council dealings will also help build a more
genuine and trusting relationship between employee representatives and managers,
which will in turn help improve working conditions for employees.

Read on to see how some of these recommendations can be applied to other
unionised workplaces.
