## 04 — RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AGILISTS OPERATING IN UNIONISED ENVIRONMENTS

### 4.1. Building Trust

Aversion to change. Clashes with legal frameworks. Unions being perceived as roadblocks to progress. All these factors can make the implementation of business agility in unionised workplaces difficult. None, however, pose as big as a challenge as a fundamental lack of trust between employers and managers when it comes to implementing change.

Put simply – if unions and workforces don’t believe that business agility implementers are acting with the best intentions of their business and employees in mind, they won’t get on board. Trust is the foundation for all interactions between unions, employees and business agility teams.

As such, we recommend a number of methods for creating trust between unions and agile organisations. The exact methods will vary depending on the size of the workforce and union in question, the location of the business/employee base, existing employee cultures, and the nature and history of the relationship between unionised workers and their employers.

Our first recommendation is to work with employees and unions to bring employee concerns and misperceptions to light. A common method of empowering employees to voice these concerns is empathy mapping, which can encourage employees to share their feelings, fears and emotions regarding the process of business agility transformation. Aggregating the results of empathy maps are an excellent way of giving employees the confidence to voice their doubts and concerns, both with management and agile principles. Better, more open strategies can then be synthesised based on this feedback. After all, if business agility implementers aren’t aware and responding to employee concerns, they aren’t acting in employees best interests.

Our second recommendation is that, once an adoption of business agility values and principles begins, the team must commit and maintain a process of complete transparency. This includes disclosing the intentions of agile teams, their final objectives, the processes they will take to reach those objectives, and any figures relevant to the business in question, including salaries, overtime, penalty rates and other compensation packages. This level of transparency has two purposes. The first: to reinforce bonds between unionised and non-unionised employees, letting them know that, regardless of disagreements regarding intentions and objectives, everyone in the team is still working toward positive and equitable outcomes. The second is to clarify lines between business agility processes and other unrelated processes taking place in the same workforce: for example, some workplaces suffer unrelated redundancies in parallel with business agility transformations, and unless employees have complete clarity about what a business agility transformation entails, they may conflate the two processes.

As a rollout of business agility continues, our third recommendation is that management should engage in a hearts-and-minds campaign. This is vital when engaged in a process that has the potential to alienate employees and sow distrust among the workforce, especially in businesses missing the crucial middle-management conduit between workers and employees. There are many strategies a management team can implement to win the hearts and minds of employees, many of which revolve around core principles of improving workers’understanding of internal changes, developing worker investment in their jobs, demonstrating that workers will be supported throughout the upcoming changes by workplace systems and structures, investing in the development of workers’ talent and skills, and having workplace leaders model the new roles in a positive fashion. If management engages in these processes genuinely and openly, they will retain the trust and commitment of their workforce. If not, they will alienate their employees and deepen the chasm between management and workers.

In some workforces, trust between workers and management has already been eroded by a lack of transparency, or through transformations that have chipped away at worker’s rights. In these cases, it’s recommended to introduce a third party to act as mediators between unionised employees and their employers. This may seem counterintuitive, as it directly contradicts business agility principles regarding minimising distance between workers and employers. Don’t worry – this recommendation shouldn’t be taken as a permanent shift in communication structure. Rather, it’s a brief interim step that allows employees and employers to debate and negotiate with emotional distance while srelationships are rebuilt.

Finally, if all these approaches are ineffective or inappropriate for the workplace in question, implementation teams can seek out worker and management training relevant to their region and field of work. For example, Australian teams can liaise with Fair Work Australia, who offer the New Approaches program. This program trains workers and management in dispute resolutions, interest-based bargaining, and collaborative workplace change, with the goal of creating productive, cooperative and healthy workplaces. All these goals align with agile values, and similar programs can be found in most countries. If in doubt, seek them out!

### 4.2. Education

Education is a more long-term solution to the problem of union resistance to change. Put simply – change mindsets before changing systems. Instead of railroading unions into participating in business agility implementation, reach out to union members and offer to coach them on the advantages of agile principles and values.

After all, a unionised workforce has no reason to trust in business agility principles if their representatives don’t share that trust, and unions have no reason to believe agile values will benefit their members until they see those benefits in action. Coaching a union throughout the implementation of top-down change will increase the chances of that union being truly invested in the outcomes of business agility across their workforce.

This sort of coaching shouldn’t be limited to union representatives. It can extend to employees, management, and employees outside but adjacent to the business in question. Increasing an understanding of business agility both internally and externally can assist in changing mindsets and increase buy-in from everyone involved. However, at an absolute minimum, unionised employees need to be involved in these coaching and education programs. Bringing workers into the fold demonstrates two things: that management is interested in developing them both as employees and as people, and that the business agility implementation is not a closed-off, secretive, or threatening process.

So, what form should this coaching and education take? That depends upon the nature of the business, the shape of its structure, number of employees, and so on. Whatever method is chosen to fit the business in question, one essential factor that should be emphasised throughout the coaching process is that business agility seeks to increase value – not only the value of a business, but the value of each and every employee. It’s common for employees to associate a change in procedures with a reduction in costs, which in turn is associated with redundancies and streamlining of workforces. That isn’t the goal of business agility; rather, it seeks to make every employee adaptable and empowered while streamlining or eliminating value-less activities. If individual or team coaching helps employees and union representatives understand these values, their investment in the process will grow.

### 4.3. Collaboration

One of the earliest selling points of enterprise bargaining and unionisation was that it would return control of workplace initiatives to the workers. By electing employees to represent their contemporaries as part of the union, they could create deeper connections between workers and employers, and allow collaboration between the two parties when it came time to discuss methods of increasing workplace productivity.

Unfortunately, a utopia of workplace collaboration hasn’t eventuated in most unionised environments. Major decisions still rest with employers. For workers, losing control is scary. It’s why unions and employees often have a visceral negative reaction to outside forces – such as business agility implementers – entering their workplace and, in their eyes, changing how everything functions. An individual in that workplace might agree with the overall concept of implementing agile values and principles, but the thought of not being able to choose how, when and where those values are integrated into an existing business can be intimidating.

This is why, in addition to transparency, collaboration between implementers and unions/union members is essential. Once trust has been established between agile teams and unions, and union members have been educated as to the purposes, processes and goals of the business agility implementation, the actual shape, method and tempo of that implementation should be debated and finalised by a team of employees, management, union representatives and business agility implementers.

When we speak of shape, method and tempo, we refer to the myriad ways in which business agility can be implemented inside an organisation. For example, should agile values be implemented across the entire workplace, or begin with a small experimental team? Should negotiations regarding individual workplace agreements include salaries, responsibilities, working hours, and contracted promotions? How quickly should these changes come into play: immediately, or gradually over weeks, months, or years?

All of these decisions should be made in consultation and collaboration with employees and union representatives. For example, if it’s decided that implementation will start small, with an experimental team, then union representatives will be the best equipped to identify that team. Working with existing teams rather than against them helps build trust between employees and business agility implementers, and also serves as an ongoing learning tool.

As mentioned earlier, education for employees and union members is key to the successful implementation of agile values and principles. The best method of education is active engagement. And taking union members through a collaborative process is an excellent way of teaching them about the principles, values and objectives of business agility.

### 4.4. Start small and scale later

It’s usually up to a collaborative team of union members and agile experts working inside an organisation to decide how to begin implementing business agility, but our recommendation is always to start small and scale up later. Why? Because every team, business and market is different, and understanding exactly how to implement business agility to the best advantage of the business and team may require experimentation and ideation.

In order to ideate quickly, you need a small pool of employees for whom a business agility transformation is both immediately appropriate and beneficial. With the assistance of union members, this team can function as a test space for how business agility can create value and flexibility for employees and employers alike.

It’s also a way to demonstrate how agile values can be implemented using an agile approach – by beginning in a small, controlled manner, demonstrating value, and quickly adapting if any negative impacts upon the team are identified. This has a number of effects upon a test team: it demonstrates to the larger team how agile values can work for them, and it emphasises how failure is part of the road toward eventual success. When a small team is allowed or even encouraged to experiment, make mistakes, and grow from those errors, it exemplifies the First Attempt In Learning approach to failure – that failing is a necessary part of the creative process, and that it’s only through analysing and improving upon failure that we can accelerate toward success.

Once a test team has been established and they’ve had time to implement and refine business agility methods of working, union representatives and business agility implementers can work together to scale these methods across a larger organisation. Workers from the original small team can be seeded throughout departments as evangelists who can teach others about the advantages of business agility. Using these methods, a large organisation can experience the best possible introduction to business agility: a safe, gradual transition, pioneered and championed by trusted workers.

### 4.5. Opportunities

Our penultimate recommendation when implementing business agility in unionised environments is to take advantage of unexpected opportunities to build connections and sow seeds. The first agile value is individuals and interactions over processes and tools, and genuine interactions and connections with employees and union representatives are what will help change perceptions of business agility for the better.

Take opportunities to connect with employees, union representatives and employers outside work. While strong professional bonds can be built during the nine-to-five, a certain amount of friction vanishes as soon as you step outside those boundaries. Drinks after work, social events, barbecues and family events are all excellent times to build genuine relationships with employees. Through relationships comes trust, and through trust comes commitment. If you can’t meet with employees in person, make use of video conferencing systems as often as possible. This is doubly relevant when working with remote teams, as any form of direct interaction is better than none. Business agility is about building human connections, so take every opportunity and use any system available that lets you speak directly to your teammates.

Employee turnover is sometimes seen as a setback to the promotion of business agility values and principles, but there is one way in which turnover can become an opportunity for future implementations. If employees who have benefited from business agility leave a department or an organisation, we recommend you continue to liaise with them to extend awareness of these new practices into new workforces and environments. This will lay the groundwork for ongoing transformations.

### 4.6. Create Employee Trust with Concrete Compensation

The final hurdle you may face when implementing business agility in a unionised workplace is the issue of compensation.

We’ve already discussed how individual negotiations for salaries, sick leave, bonuses, etcetera can confuse or intimidate workers. This confusion is compounded when workers are also asked to negotiate more complex, non-tangible workplace benefits. These may include sponsored professional development opportunities, or the ability to move latitudinally to new positions within the organisation. If individual workers or management approach these negotiations with an adversarial mindset, the challenges increase exponentially.

One solution to the problem of negotiating tangible, financial benefits is a hybrid system that assesses the skills each worker brings to the table and compensates them based on a standardised table of skill levels. This clarifies compensation levels and allows workers to accurately assess what skills they need to develop in order to grow their roles and compensations. These hybrid models can take many forms: for example, Spotify uses the Steps model to compensate employees, where an employee’s career ‘step’ is based on their impact upon their team and the company.

Involving employees in the creation of these skill tables is an excellent way to reinforce an atmosphere of trust and collaboration. Individual workers council, union or employer groups can discuss, trial and iterate compensation structures in small groups, before expanding those structures across the organisation. These compensation structures can be expanded to include the aforementioned non-tangible workplace benefits. Employees will be able to use business agility principles of collaboration during their negotiations, trust in the fairness and transparency of the structure, and have clear discussions about their skills, expectations, and plans for moving up, down, or sideways through the organisation.

### CASE STUDY — AN AMERICAN TRANSPORTATION COMPANY

One case study illustrating how these solutions can be implemented in a difficult work environment is the agile transformation of an American transportation business. One of this business’s concerns was the purchasing and maintenance of buses for public transportation. The maintenance department – who were in urgent need of parts for repair and upkeep – and the purchasing department – who were pursuing unrealistic budget KPIs – had been in conflict so long that only 13% of the bus fleet could be considered well-maintained. While the two teams were highly unionised and employees had raised issues of cross-departmental communication in the past, union representatives had been unable to solve the impasse.

A Scrum approach was introduced to the managerial team to solve the impasse. Once the managers were trained and understood Agile principles and Scrum processes, they became role models and promoters. One manager decided to implement Scrum with his team and the purchasing department, and after consultation, it was decided that a Scrum/Kanban (Scurmban) hybrid approach was a better fit for his needs.

At first, many team members did not trust that the new process would improve their situation. The manager and his Agile coach presented their plan to the executive to ask for support. They extensively educated the teams and introduced a game to help roll out the Scrumban approach. This process of engagement took a year of daily meetings and crossover work between the two teams, ensuring that all employees and executives understood the new rules and structures under which the business would be managed. By emphasising discipline, self-organisation, and self-empowerment amongst the workers, they were able to raise the percentage of well-maintained buses from 13% to 80%.

At the time of the rollout, only one member of the 15-person team continued to oppose the new approach: a middle-manager who had lost some degree of autonomy in his workflow. However, after witnessing the efficiency gained through the new working methods, this manager was observed setting up his own Kanban board.

### CASE STUDY — A STATE GOVERNMENT AGENCY

A state government environmental department of around 2500 people was responsible for waste management and recovery in their jurisdiction. Waste production was overtaking population growth, especially in contrast with the jurisdiction’s neighbours. As such, the department commenced a new Integrated Waste Program (IWP) to tackle the problem. Their vision was to reduce waste by promoting sustainable practices for businesses, industry and households.

Nine months after the program’s implementation, performance was slipping. Recruitment processes had failed to draw in the right talent, both legislative and systems reform was lagging, and stakeholders were growing frustrated. In order to meet upcoming milestones, executive leadership decided to apply an Agile approach to their way of working.

Due to the large team size, the work was recast into a series of cross-functional work-streams that required employees from different divisions to work together on a daily basis. Groups with specifically applicable skillsets and practices were identified, along with stream leaders. All leaders were required to attend fortnightly planning sessions and whole-of-team stand up meetings 3 times per week.

Implementation was not completely smooth. Some workers were reluctant to participate in major changes to work practices. Sensitive engagement was required in order to navigate their objections, particularly when union representatives were involved. However, department-wide benefits to the new process were quick to emerge. A key union representative who noticed a streamlining in work practices and approval processes acted as a positive voice in leadership meetings. Senior executives were invited to the tri-weekly team stand-ups and were able to directly engage with team members, bypassing middle-management. Middle-management quickly saw the advantage in this, as this freed them up to do more time-effective leading.

The Agile approach identified expertise in the department who were encouraged to share their skills without invoking complex recruitment processes. Participation was offered on an opt in basis, which gave staff an opportunity to ‘try before you buy’ rather than commit to a major career move, all with the full support of union reps. This increase in transparency and communication also led more staff to engage with corporate services, which reinforced that the IWP was a place of genuine and authentic engagement.
